---
layout: post
title: Row 1, Row 2+
date: 2019-06-03 00:06 -0400
---

Up until now, Gemini (the Atari 2600 Jetpack port) has been able to display a
16x26 grid of individually toggleable "gems", but each row was identical. The
proof of concept at the moment is whether we can individually address gems on a
single horizontal line, which is solved by modifying a kernel stored in RAM. The
next milestone is being able to reconfigure this kernel between rows so that we
can show different Gem states per row.

The code that configures the kernel hasn't been optimized and so expectations
should be low: it turns out each configuration step takes upward of 14
scanlines, meaning in a single overscan period, you can run this configuration
twice. And so the goal to start with is configuring two different rows, row 1
and row 2+.

The goal is to transition to using our 256 bytes of CBSRAM to store Gem state
and kernel data. Until now, CBSRAM was where our inner kernel was stored, which
is modified on each row to show a different set of gems. We want to adopt this
CBSRAM memory layout:

```
16 bytes x 16 rows:
    abcdefghijkl0123
    ^ kernel    ^ 4 byte
      data (A/B)  gem state
```

This means we can store 12 bytes of kernel data, a small reduction from the 16
or so which are store today for the single row. 16 bytes x 16 rows is 256 bytes,
which means all of CBSRAM is dedicated to this layout. However, note that kernel
data is specialized for the kernel it is run with: A or B. This means that we
can only store half the kernel data we need, unless we re-run kernel setup each
frame. We work around this by storing the 4-byte gem state, which doesn't change
by kernel, at the end of the array. This is then used to regenerate the kernel
state each frame, but requires us to generate kernel state for 16 rows in ~30
scanlines, rather than the target rate of 2 rows. That's a big leap!

Next step is to make all *writes* indexed by Y, so that they can be retrieved the
same way. Then pick up stragglers.

**Release 0x01:** 
